Alameda High School is a public coeducational high school serving grades 9-12. It is located in Alameda, California and is part of the Alameda Unified School District.


== History ==
It was at the Alameda Board of Education meeting held on March 6, 1874, that the suggestion to open a Preparatory Department of a High School' was first presented. On April 17, 1874, C. Y. Johns was elected the first principal. Classes began with 52 students, in July 1874, in a rented room over a drugstore on Park Street known as "Boehmer's Hall". The building still exists today as the China House restaurant.
Boehmer's Hall was only temporary. Already a new building was being built on a site on Santa Clara at Chestnut, completed and occupied in 1875. The high school shared space with the Grammar Department in what became known as Haight School', a site still occupied by this school today. The class of 1878, totalling nine students, was the first to graduate from Alameda High School.
It wasn't long before the number of students enrolled in the high school outgrew the space available at Haight. Temporary quarters were located at the Porter school, located on Alameda Avenue, by 1900. A campaign was started for a new separate high school building.
With the help of the high school student body, a bond was passed in the city for the new school. The cornerstone was laid in 1902 on the new site at Central and Walnut. The building was dedicated in 1903 and occupied in time for the December 1903 term.
Continued growth in enrollment required an even larger campus. In 1925 a new bond issue was voted on. The new school, dedicated in 1926, comprised three connected buildings, including the original 1903 structure which was refurbished to blend with the architectural style of the other two. The architecture, designed by local architect Carl Werner, is early-twentieth-century Neo-Classical Revival in nature, evoking images of ancient Greek temples with Ionic columns in front of the Kofman Auditorium, a facility known throughout the Bay Area as one of the best of the local playhouses.
By 1955, the old building' had outlived its usefulness and was replaced with what became known as the new building' by subsequent students until 1977.
Campaigns to replace old public buildings with newer earthquake-safe structures led to the construction of the newest high school building, across the street from the established campus, on Encinal at Walnut.
Original plans involved tearing down the 1926 buildings and replacing them with a sports complex, the only building to be kept being the new building' of 1955. A dedicated group of alumni and citizens saved the venerable buildings and the planned new construction was scaled back to what exists today.
The newest building was first occupied in 1978 and included the site of the former Porter school. The west wing now houses Language and Fine Arts, as well as the Frederick L. Chacon Little Theater. The school was made an Alameda Historical Monument in 1976 and listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1977.


== Enrollment and academics ==
Alameda High School is an ethnically diverse school, reporting, for the 2011-2012 academic year, a composition that is 50% Asian, 32.3% White, 8.5% Hispanic/Latino, 5% Filipino, 4% African-American, less than 1% American Indian/Native Alaskan, and less than 1% Mixed/Not Reporting.
The school has received National Blue Ribbon recognition and California Distinguished School and Digital High School awards. It is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, offering more than a dozen Advanced Placement courses. The school also has a very strong journalism course which produces the monthly student newspaper publication "The Oak Leaf."
Its Academic Performance Index is 9/10, also the highest on the island, with a similar schools rank of 2/10. Alameda is also currently ranked #483 in the top 1200 high schools in the US.
In 2012, 88% of its students graduated, with 25% of those graduates attending college.


== Athletics ==
AHS was part of the Alameda/Contra Costa Athletic League (ACCAL) of the North Coast Section (NCS) of the California Interscholastic Federation (CIF).

Encinal High, Alameda High, and St. Joseph Notre Dame High School collectively field men's and women's Rugby union teams.
Other Varsity sports include:
Badminton
Baseball
Basketball (Men's and Women's)
Football
Diving
Golf
Cheerleading
Cross Country
Soccer (Men's and Women's)
Softball
Swimming (Men's and Women's)
Tennis (Men's and Women's)
Track & Field
Volleyball (Men's and Women's)
Water Polo (Men's and Women's)


== Notable alumni ==
Dick Bartell, professional baseball player, New York Giants
Danny Chauncey, guitarist for .38 Special
Debbi Fields, creator of Mrs. Fields bakery
William F. Knowland (class of 1925), United States Senator
Kreayshawn (attended starting 2004-2006, did not graduate) Best known for her hit single Gucci Gucci
Jim Morrison (attended starting 1958, did not graduate), songwriter, lead singer for The Doors
Simon Rex (class of 1992), actor
Ian Axel, songwriter, leader of A Great Big World
Chris Speier, professional baseball player, San Francisco Giants
Stephen Stucker, actor
Tim Samaras, Engineer and Meteorologist, Killed in 2013 El Reno tornado
Finish Ticket, band


== Notable faculty ==
Don Perata, politician (former faculty)


== References ==


== External links ==
Alameda High School
Newsweek school rankings
San Francisco Chronicle story about the baseball team
U.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System: Alameda High School