The eudicots, Eudicotidae or eudicotyledons are a monophyletic clade of flowering plants that had been called tricolpates or non-magnoliid dicots by previous authors. The botanical terms were introduced in 1991 by evolutionary botanist James A. Doyle and paleobotanist Carol L. Hotton to emphasize the later evolutionary divergence of tricolpate dicots from earlier, less specialized, dicots. The close relationships among flowering plants with tricolpate pollen grains was initially seen in morphological studies of shared derived characters. These plants have a distinct trait in their pollen grains of exhibiting three colpi or grooves paralleling the polar axis. Later molecular evidence confirmed the genetic basis for the evolutionary relationships among flowering plants with tricolpate pollen grains and dicotyledonous traits. The term means "true dicotyledons", as it contains the majority of plants that have been considered dicots and have characteristics of the dicots. The term "eudicots" has subsequently been widely adopted in botany to refer to one of the two largest clades of angiosperms (constituting over 70% of the angiosperm species), monocots being the other. The remaining angiosperms are sometimes referred to as basal angiosperms or paleodicots, but these terms have not been widely or consistently adopted, as they do not refer to a monophyletic group.
The other name for the eudicots is tricolpates, a name which refers to the grooved structure of the pollen. Members of the group have tricolpate pollen, or forms derived from it. These pollens have three or more pores set in furrows called colpi. In contrast, most of the other seed plants (that is the gymnosperms, the monocots and the paleodicots) produce monosulcate pollen, with a single pore set in a differently oriented groove called the sulcus. The name "tricolpates" is preferred by some botanists to avoid confusion with the dicots, a nonmonophyletic group. 
Numerous familiar plants are eudicots, including many common food plants, trees, and ornamentals. Some common and familiar eudicots include members of the sunflower family such as the common dandelion, the forget-me-not, cabbage and other members of its family, apple, buttercup, maple, and macadamia. Most leafy trees of midlatitudes also belong to eudicots, with notable exceptions being magnolias and tulip trees which belong to magnoliids, and Ginkgo biloba, which is not an angiosperm.
The name "eudicots" (plural) is used in the APG system, of 1998, and APG II system, of 2003, for classification of angiosperms. It is applied to a clade, a monophyletic group, which includes most of the (former) dicots.


== Subdivisions ==
The eudicots can be divided into two groups: the basal eudicots and the core eudicots. Basal eudicot is an informal name for a paraphyletic group. The core eudicots are a monophyletic group. A 2010 study suggested the core eudicots can be divided into two clades, Gunnerales and a clade called "Pentapetalae", comprising all the remaining core eudicots.
The Pentapetalae can be then divided into three clades:
the Dilleniaceae
a "superrosid" clade consisting of Saxifragales, Vitales and rosids (the APG III system includes the Vitales in the rosids)
a "superasterid" clade consisting of Santalales, Berberidopsidales, Caryophyllales and asterids
Within the core eudicots, the largest groups are the "rosids" (core group with the prefix "eu") and the "asterids" (core group with the prefix "eu").
This division of the eudicots is shown in the following cladogram:
The following is a more detailed breakdown, showing within each clade some unplaced families and orders (unplaced genera are not mentioned):
clade eudicots

family Buxaceae [+ family Didymelaceae]
family Sabiaceae
family Trochodendraceae [+ family Tetracentraceae]

order Ranunculales
order Proteales

clade core eudicots

family Aextoxicaceae
family Berberidopsidaceae
family Dilleniaceae

order Gunnerales
order Caryophyllales
order Saxifragales
order Santalales

clade rosids

family Aphloiaceae
family Geissolomataceae
family Ixerbaceae
family Picramniaceae
family Strasburgeriaceae
family Vitaceae

order Crossosomatales
order Geraniales
order Myrtales

clade eurosids I

family Zygophyllaceae [+ family Krameriaceae]
family Huaceae

order Celastrales
order Malpighiales
order Oxalidales
order Fabales
order Rosales
order Cucurbitales
order Fagales

clade eurosids II

family Tapisciaceae

order Brassicales
order Malvales
order Sapindales

clade asterids

order Cornales
order Ericales

clade euasterids I

family Boraginaceae
family Icacinaceae
family Oncothecaceae
family Vahliaceae

order Garryales
order Solanales
order Gentianales
order Lamiales

clade euasterids II

family Bruniaceae
family Columelliaceae [+ family Desfontainiaceae]
family Eremosynaceae
family Escalloniaceae
family Paracryphiaceae
family Polyosmaceae
family Sphenostemonaceae
family Tribelaceae

order Aquifoliales
order Apiales
order Dipsacales
order Asterales

Note :  + .... = optional, as a segregate of the previous family


== References ==

Doyle, J. A. & Hotton, C. L. Diversification of early angiosperm pollen in a cladistic context. pp. 169195 in Pollen and Spores. Patterns of Diversification (eds Blackmore, S. & Barnes, S. H.) (Clarendon, Oxford, 1991).
Walter S. Judd and Richard G. Olmstead (2004). "A survey of tricolpate (eudicot) phylogenetic relationships". American Journal of Botany 91 (10): 16271644. doi:10.3732/ajb.91.10.1627. PMID 21652313.  (full text )
Eudicots in Stevens, P. F. (2001 onwards). Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. Version 7, May 2006.


== External links ==
Eudicots at the Encyclopedia of Life
Eudicots, Tree of Life Web Project
Dicots Plant Life Forms