Jamestown Community College is a two-year college in the SUNY system. JCC's main campus is in the city of Jamestown in Chautauqua County, New York. Also located in Chautauqua County is JCC's North County Extension Center, which is in Dunkirk. JCC's second main campus serves Cattaraugus County in Olean. A fourth site is located in Warren, Pennsylvania. The college offers degree and certificate programs in many areas.
Founded in 1950, Jamestown Community College was the first community college in the State University of New York system. The college has grown from an enrollment of 169 students attending classes at Jamestown High School to an enrollment of over 3,500 in a multi-campus institution. The Jamestown Campus is located on a 107-acre (0.43 km2) site at the foot of Chautauqua Lake in Jamestown, New York. The Cattaraugus County Campus is located 50 miles (80 km) east of Jamestown in Olean, New York.
JCC's Warren Center opened in 1987 to provide degrees in Business Administration and Social Science. JCC operates the Center under a contract with the Warren-Forest Higher Education Council, and the Center is licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Education. The Warren center is 25 miles south of Jamestown, New York.


== History ==
Jamestown Community College is committed to connecting its students to their goals by providing challenging educational experiences in a caring environment. Founded in 1950 as a predominantly transfer, liberal arts oriented institution, JCC was among the first community colleges within the State University of New York.
JCC has remained committed to the humanities and liberal arts while expanding to meet the social imperatives of vocational education and community service. The threefold purpose of the college is to serve those students desiring transfer programs, provide technical and career programs for those who wish to seek employment immediately after graduation, and offer the community the opportunity to pursue part-time study for improvement of job skills and cultural enrichment.


== Accomplishments ==
In spring 2012, JCC was named the "Top Performing Public Two-Year College" in New York, according to a report published by The Chronicle of Higher Education, the nation's leading publication of news and information about colleges and universities. The report was created using research supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Factors taken into consideration in compiling the report included graduation rate, completions per every 100 students, cost per completion, spending per completion, student aid per recipient, and percentage of students receiving federal Pell Grants.
JCC topped the list of public two-year colleges, which included 35 institutions from within the State University of New York (SUNY) and the City University of New York (CUNY) with at least 200 freshmen per year.
The Chronicle, citing JCC data from students entering college in the fall of 2007, reports JCC's graduation rate as 34.8 in 150% time and 30.2 in 100% time. New York's graduation rate averages were 19.6 and 10.9 respectively. As graduation rates at four-year colleges are typically measured in terms of six-year and four-year rates, 150% and 100% become the equivalent at two-year institutions as students seeking both associate degrees and certificates are included.


== Science Center ==
Opened in the fall of 2011, JCC's Science Center was designed to meet LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) silver standards and is a showplace for sustainability in building design and operation. The center includes a number of "green" features that enable energy conservation and promote environmentally conscious thinking.
Housed within the Science Center are JCC's associate degrees in liberal arts and sciences: math and science, environmental science, and biotechnology. The center features state-of-the-art classrooms, labs, and prep rooms for courses in biology, biotechnology, chemistry, and geology as well as a student study area, loft lounge, greenhouse, and vegetative roof.


=== Green Features ===
Rain water and snow melt are collected in underground tanks located on the west side of the building, then filtered and pumped into the building for flushing toilets, watering the plants in the 300 square foot greenhouse, and dripirrigation of the vegetative roof garden.
Covering roughly one third of the building, our garden roof will provide habitat for wildlife, storm-water erosion control and treatment, thermal insulation and moderation, an outdoor botanical classroom, and a beautiful place for instruction and inspiration.
Sun tunnels (sun pipes) located in the hallways in the north and south wings of the building, bring natural daylight from the rooftops into interior hallways, enhancing natural lighting and reducing electricity use. The electrical lights in these spaces contain sensors minimizing power use during daylight hours.
Light shelves and sun screens, installed on either the inside or the outside of the windows, are used to either diffuse additional natural light into the building without producing additional heat, or limit intense sunlight of summer, enhancing energy efficiency.
Windows and doors have Solarban 80 glass, a high-performance, Low-E glass for solar control.
Approximately 40% of the project area has been restored to a meadow habitat seeded with native flowers, grasses, shrubs, and trees, restoring valuable wetland ecosystem functions and habitat for wildlife, and providing outdoor laboratories and learning spaces.
Eastern and western pergola and canopy systems provide shading with an aesthetic appeal, and native landscaping and plantings for wildlife surround the building.
Water-permeable pathways lead from the building to JCCs College Park. These porous, gravel pathways reduce storm-water run-off and soil erosion, allow groundwater recharge, and affording faculty, students, and visitors the opportunity to walk from the building to the park to observe native plant species in a natural environment.
The white roofing membrane is light reflective to minimize heat buildup and heat island effects in the warm weather months.
A demonstration photovoltaic solar array located on the south stair tower and a two-well geothermal well system showcase energy consciousness and conservation and are linked to a real-time digital dashboard panel displaying power consumption and energy savings associated with these carbon footprint-reducing technologies.
Recycled materials were used in the building and furniture, and FSC-certified wood was used where possible to promote environmentally sustainable natural resource consumption. Likewise, a portion of all building materials were required to be purchased from suppliers within a 500-mile radius, promoting regional economies and minimizing fossil fuel use associated with shipping materials.
A significant amount of construction waste was diverted from landfills and instead has been recycled.
Indoor environmental quality has been assured via use of low-emitting adhesives, sealants, paints, coatings, carpet systems, composite wood, and agrifiber products.


== Tuition and Financial Aid ==
The annual cost of tuition for a full-time student (taking 12 credit hours or more in a semester) who is a New York resident is $4,050. For non-New York residents, full-time annual tuition is $8,100. Tuition is $170 per credit hour for New York residents and $305 for non-New York residents. Students are allowed to enroll at less than full-time, however, only full-time are allowed to stay in the Hillside Suites residence halls. JCC offers several forms of financial aid, including scholarships. One of JCC's largest and most successful scholarship programs is the USA (which stands for Unified Student Assistance) scholarship. The USA scholarship, awarded to students who graduate within the top 20% of their high school class, covers the amount of NYS resident tuition, minus Pell, TAP and PHEAA.


== Campus Life ==
JCC has a variety of chartered clubs and organizations for students to experience, with topics ranging from creative writing to biotechnology.


=== Student Government ===
The officially recognized student governing body is the Student Senate. Students have a direct voice in all student affairs and many college activities through active participation in the student government.


=== CAB ===
The Campus Activity Board (CAB) and the College Program Committee are the two organizations that are responsible for bringing activities (speakers, artists, musicians, etc.) to campus. The CAB is composed of only students while the College Program Committee is composed of both faculty and students.


=== Athletics ===
JCC is a member of the Western New York Athletic Conference and Region III of the National Junior College Athletic Association. Both JCC's Jamestown and Cattaraugus County Campuses field teams. The Jamestown teams are known as the Jayhawks and the Cattaraugus County teams are the Jaguars.
Jamestown Campus
Men's Soccer
Women's Soccer
Men's Baseball
Men's Basketball
Women's Basketball
Men's and Women's Golf
Men's and Women's Swimming/Diving
Women's Volleyball
Men's Wrestling
Cattaraugus County Campus
Women's Soccer
Women's Softball
Men's Basketball


=== The Arts at JCC ===
Weeks Gallery The Weeks Gallery enriches cultural lives by presenting significant visual, performing, and interdisciplinary art programs for the region. The gallery is located on the Jamestown Campus in the Arts and Sciences Center. In 2009, the Weeks Gallery staff opened the Center Gallery on the JCC Cattaraugus County Campus. The Center Gallery presents local artists and faculty from regional colleges. Highlights include the CCAC Members Show and the Southern Tier Biennial (STB), a regional survey of contemporary art on the southern tier. In 2011, the Weeks Gallery received two significant donations  Ken and Lois Strickler donated Andy Warhols Marilyn Monroe serigraph and Larry Diggs donated a small-untitled bronze by Louise Nevelson.
Scharmann Theatre Located on the Jamestown Campus of Jamestown Community College, in the Arts and Sciences Center, the Scharmann Theatre hosts dozens of cultural events and lectures a year. It's also home to the JCC Uncommoners, a student theatre troupe that puts on two productions per academic year. The theatre is named for Robert Lee Scharmann, who first began teaching English and drama at JCC in 1956, and died in 1976. The current coordinator of the Scharmann Theatre is Robert T. Schlick, and Steven Gustafson, a member of the band 10,000 Maniacs, serves as its technical director.


== On-Campus Housing ==
JCC provides on-campus living for 340 students in its three Hillside Suites residence halls. The halls offer students suite-style living, including four to five fully furnished bedrooms, a living room, kitchen, dining area, and two full bathrooms. The suites contain primarily single bedrooms, with a limited amount of double bedrooms available. All buildings are alcohol and tobacco free.
JCC also features a cafe on campus, which students are able to purchase a meal plan for.


== Notable alumni ==
Samuel Teresi, Mayor of Jamestown
Natalie Merchant, recording artist
William Parment, New York State Assemblyman
Bryan Hodgson, University at Buffalo, Basketball Coach


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Jamestown Community College Video Overview