Lawrence Alexander Hardie (January 13, 1933  December 17, 2013) was an American geologist, sedimentologist, and geochemist. For nearly 50 years, he mentored students and pursued research as a Professor at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) in Baltimore MD in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences. He authored or co-authored numerous scientific papers and several books. He made seminal contributions to our understanding of evaporites, dolomitization, cyclical deposition of carbonate sediments, and plate tectonic driven changes in seawater chemistry. In the latter, he proposed that changes in the seafloor spreading rates at mid-ocean ridges have altered the composition of seawater throughout earth history, producing oscillations in the mineralogy of carbonate and evaporite precipitates. Specifically citing these scientific contributions, the Society for Sedimentary Geology (SEPM) awarded him the Francis J. Pettijohn Medal in 2003.


== Early life and education ==
He was born in Durban, Natal, South Africa, on January 13, 1933. He attended the University of Natal, Durban, originally to pursue an undergraduate degree in chemistry. He was inspired to study geology after attending lectures by eminent South African geologist Lester Charles King. In addition to his new found passion for geology, soccer was a big part of Lawrence's life during this time. As a student, he was selected as a member of the South African Universities "All Star" team four times. He earned a B.Sc. degree in Geology and Chemistry in 1955, and a B.Sc. (Hons.) degree in Geology in 1956. In 1957, he was hired by Dr. King as an Instructor and began by teaching beginning classes in geology. At the same time he started to work on his Master's thesis on the origin of the Table Mountain Sandstone. He earned an M.Sc. in Geology in 1959 under the guidance of Drs. Peter Matthews and Joseph Frankel.
In 1960, he was awarded a Fellowship by the South African Council for Scientific and Industrial Research to spend an academic year in the U.S. He went to Johns Hopkins University and began working with sedimentologist Dr. Francis J. Pettijohn and geochemist Dr. Hans Eugster, in a newly built geochemistry laboratory. There he conducted experimental work on evaporite minerals. Near the end of his second semester, he was offered a full-time graduate fellowship to earn a Ph.D. He briefly returned to South Africa to marry Glenys Kathleen Smith in Durban.
Upon graduating with a Ph.D. in 1965, he was offered a position as an assistant professor at Hopkins. Both Lawrence and Glenys became U.S. citizens and they had two children, Deborah and Russell. Lawrence shared his love of the natural world and of science with his children. Deborah obtained a degree in mathematics at JHU, and Russell studied engineering at nearby Loyola University Maryland. His son Russell is currently a professor in the department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Dayton and credits his father as his inspiration for pursuing a career in academia.


== Scientific career ==

After completing his doctoral work, he joined the faculty at JHU as an assistant professor in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences in 1965. He worked his way through the academic ranks to full professor. He also served as the department chair from 1992 to 1995, and again in 20042006. He retired in 2007 to the status of professor emeritus. He had many important scientific achievements during his academic career. He also inspired and mentored numerous students.
In the words of former student and colleague Dr. Linda Hinnov, "Lawrie Hardie made invaluable contributions to the educational mission of Johns Hopkins, by taking students out of the classroom and into the field, allowing them to witness geologic processes firsthand at far-flung locations". He ran the JHU field camp (Camp Singewald) in western Maryland for many summers in the 1960s and 1970s. He also led regular field trips to the Florida Keys and Assateague Island, and led many other trips to locations such as the Bahamas and Baja California, Mexico. His work also took him frequently to the Dolomites in Italy. He was no stranger to long hikes and climbs. Some of his field work required the use of special modes of transportation including Zodiac inflatable boats, minibikes, and 3-wheeled all terrain vehicles (see photo).

According to JHU University News (January 28, 2014) , "Hardie was beloved at Johns Hopkins for his devotion to students at all levels. He was a mentor to more than 30 Ph.D. students, many of whom have since gone on to leadership positions in academia, industry, and government." Many of these students became enduring friends and colleagues, and continued their collaborations long after graduation. In addition to work with graduate students, Dr. Hardie also taught a popular undergraduate introductory geology course. There, Hardie enjoyed sharing his passion for geology with a wide audience that included, at one time or another, both of his children.


== Personal life and death ==
He enjoyed jazz and attended concerts at the Famous Ballroom in Baltimore. After moving out of the city in Baltimore to Pasadena, Maryland, in the 1970s, Hardie took to sailing small boats and a Tartan 27 (aptly named Trekker) on the Magothy River and the Chesapeake Bay. He taught his children and many of his students to sail. He later took up snow skiing and was an avid golfer. Along with sailing, he enjoyed sharing these activities with his family, students, and colleagues. He was married to Glenys Hardie for 52 years, had two children, and five grandchildren.
Hardie died at age 80 from complications of Alzheimer's disease on December 17, 2013, at the Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula in Monterey, California.


== Scientific achievements ==


=== Secular variation in seawater chemistry ===
Dr. Linda Hinnov describes Lawrence Hardie as internationally known for his deep insight into geological processes. His comprehensive study of evaporites led to the hypothesis, since verified, that seawater has undergone long-term variations in its major ion composition. He also demonstrated that these seawater variations are linked to plate tectonic processes at mid-ocean ridges. Together, these revolutionized the study of calcifying marine organisms and their role in the global carbon cycle. In recognition, he was awarded the Francis J. Pettijohn Medal for Excellence by the Society for Sedimentary Geology in 2003. This seawater chemistry work is perhaps Hardie's most far-reaching contribution - with implications for geochemistry, mineralogy, tectonics, biological evolution (biomineralization), oil/gas resources, and climate change. Research and experimentation with evaporites, that took place early in his career, formed the foundation for the seawater chemistry hypothesis. Dr. Hardie advocated that the signal from evaporites may be the most robust evidence for seawater chemistry change. In particular, the observed secular changes in the mineralogy of potash evaporites and ooids and cements in marine limestones  is synchronous with greenhouse/hothouse climates and global sea level. Most of Hardies predicted changes in seawater chemistry have since been verified from study of seawater trapped inside crystals of marine halite.


=== Carbonates research ===
Hardie's work on carbonates began with field research on the modern shallow marine carbonates of the Bahamas with Bob Ginsburg and others. Hardie's 1977 book on the Bahamas work is considered by one reviewer a "masterpiece" of comparative sedimentology that remains one of the premier works on carbonate sedimentology to this day. This early work evolved into the study of ancient carbonates of western Maryland (Cambro-Ordovician) and the Italian Dolomites (Triassic). Hardie's work on carbonates may be equally as far-reaching as the one on seawater chemistry, for understanding climate and sea level change, and the role of Milankovitch cycles in carbonate deposition.


=== Origin of dolomite ===
Hardie's investigations into the origins of dolomite may also count among his greatest scientific contributions. The occurrence of dolomite in the geologic record has puzzled many generations of geologists. It is intimately associated with the world's oil reserves: when dolomite replaces calcite minerals, its slightly smaller molar volume leaves voids in carbonate rock, wherein oil tends to migrate. In the Dolomites, Hardie (with student Edith Wilson) demonstrated the hydrothermal origin of dolomite in the Triassic Latemar buildup. This revolutionized the paradigm of dolomite formation, leading to new discoveries about the nature of geological fluids and their chemical imprint on the rock record.


=== Depositional cycles and composite sea level changes ===
With regard to cyclic sedimentation, a major discovery of Hardie and his students and colleagues, was that platform carbonates of the Middle Triassic (Anisian-Ladinian) of the Latemar buildup consist of a vertical stack of over 500 thin (ave. thickness 0.6-0.85m) shallowing-upward depositional cycles that record high frequency eustatic sea level oscillations in tune to Milankovitch astronomical rhythms. Each cycle consists of a basal shallow subtidal limestone capped by a thin (<0.15m) vadose dolomitic crust or caliche that records one submergence-emergence oscillation of duration about 20ky and amplitude on the order of a few meters. These 104y cycles are grouped into five-part megacycles (up to 5m thick and of 105y duration) characterized by progressive upward thinning of successive cycles within each megacycle. Repetitive bundling into sets of five cycles was demonstrated by autocorrelative time series analyses and Fischer plots. High resolution multitaper spectral analysis was used to show that the cyclostratigraphy was consistent with sea level oscillations with 20ky, 41ky, 53ky, 95ky and 100ky periodicities, within 5% of the Milankovitch lines predicted by recent astronomical calculations. Computer simulations showed that the Latemar cyclostratigraphy could be quantitatively reproduced using Milankovitch-controlled sea level oscillations.


== Awards and honors ==