MaRS Discovery District is a not-for-profit corporation founded in Toronto in 2000. Its stated goal is to commercialize publicly funded medical research and other technologies with the help of local private enterprises and as such is a public-private partnership. As part of its mission MaRS says, "MaRS helps create successful global businesses from Canadas science, technology and social innovation."
The name MaRS was originally drawn from a file name, and later attributed with the title Medical and Related Sciences. It has since abandoned this association as it also works in other fields such as Information and Communications Technology, Engineering, and Social Innovation,


== Facilities ==

It is located on the corner of College Street and University Avenue in the city of Torontos Discovery District, adjacent to the University of Toronto and its affiliated research hospitals at the University Health Network.
The MaRS development consists of two phases.


=== Phase 1 ===
MaRS Discovery District Phase 1 was designed by Adamson Associates Architects and includes:
The Heritage Building (formerly a wing of the Toronto General Hospital),
The Atrium
The South Tower
The Toronto Medical Discovery Tower
The Heritage Building
Inside the Heritage Building's four-storey brick faade (preserved) are tenant spaces occupied by professional services, industry associations, pharmaceutical companies and offices of Canadian universities and the Province of Ontario. In 2006, the MaRS Centre received the Heritage Toronto Award of Excellence for Architectural Conservation and Craftsmanship. The building was designed by Pearson and Darling and opened in 1911.
The Atrium
The MaRS atrium is a glass-roofed public thoroughfare that provides walkway access to Heritage Building tenants and retail vendors, as well as access to the South and Medical Discovery Towers. Its bottom level features a sub-dividable conference area that hosts public and private events. MaRS encourages events from across Toronto's arts, culture and broader urban community. The Atrium's lower level also features a media centre, video conferencing rooms and a public food court.
The South Tower
This eight-storey structure houses incubator programs and shared laboratory and research facilities. The 200,000-square-foot (19,000 m2), wet-lab-capable building spans eight floors in the MaRS Centre. The tower boasts advanced mechanical and electrical systems, floors with enhanced load bearing capabilities and 15-foot (4.6 m) slab-to-slab clearances.
Occupying the second and third floors of the South Tower  directly above the MaRS corporate offices, is the MaRS Incubator  a dedicated space that houses offices and laboratories for approximately two dozen life science and technology firms.
Toronto Medical Discovery Tower
With 400,000 square feet (37,000 m2) of state-of-the-art wet labs, the 15-storey Toronto Medical Discovery Tower accommodates leading-edge scientific equipment and houses the basic research activities of two of Canada's premier research hospitals: the University Health Network and the Hospital for Sick Children.
Situated on the corner of College and Elizabeth Street, the building was designed with typical research and development lab floors configured with a side core arrangement and sheathed in metal and glass. The tower portions rest on a three-storey limestone podium that aligns with the heights of the adjoining College Wing and the formal landscape forecourt that extends the full block.
The shell and core of the TMDT is designed to accommodate a full lab program based on 80 percent wet lab and 20 percent dry lab. The lab floors have been configured to maximize future flexibility. The mechanical and electrical rooms, power and communication distribution systems, general and special exhaust risers, floor drains and service zones, have been established to allow for fit-out by future tenants.
Phase 1 began operations in 2005.


=== Phase 2 ===
Phase 2, designed by Bregman + Hamann Architects, will constitute a 800,000-square-foot (74,000 m2) addition to the MaRS centre in the form of a 20-story tower on the complexs west wing. Construction began in late 2007, and was scheduled to be completed in spring 2010. In November 2008, Phase 2 construction was put on hold due to the economic downturn. Construction resumed in July 2011, with a target completion date of Fall 2013.
In 2011, construction of Phase 2 restarted. Phase 2 construction is expected to complete in September 2013. Phase 2 of the project is facing criticism because the Government of Ontario provided a bailout for the organization which is facing difficulty leasing the floors. The Ontario Progressive Conservative Party is calling for a full accounting of MaRS Phase 2.


== Supporters ==
MaRS is supported, in part, by professional service organizations which offer their expertise at no cost through education and training, and advisory hours. These organizations also contribute monetarily to MaRS.
The current list of organizations include:
Deloitte
Gowling Lafleur Henderson LLP
Miller Thomson LLP
MNP
Norton Rose Canada LLP


== Criticism ==

In April 2010, criticism of the $471,874 salary collected by MaRS CEO Ilse Treurnicht in 2008 was raised. It also criticized Liberal government-led funding, lack of accountability and rigor in measuring results, claims of public-private partnerships and the absence of visible-minorities among MaRS's team of advisors.
On August 27, 2010, the National Post relayed some of these criticisms
Renewed criticism was published in 2011, pointing in particular to the $100,000 increase in Treurnicht's salary, her $534,000 salary in 2010, and questioning the public and private funding of the Phase II expansion. The Toronto Sun published articles on the topic as well, questioning the high compensation levels at the charitable trust institution.


== Initiatives and affiliations ==
The Toronto Discovery District
California-Canada Strategic Innovation Partnership
Social Innovation Generation (SiG)
Creative Convergence Centres Project
Premiers Summit Awards
Canadian Stem Cell Network
Stockholm Science City
Net Change Week


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
MaRS Entrepreneurs Toolkit
Press Release for resumption of MaRS 'Phase 2' Expansion