The Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy (French: Ministre de l'cologie, du Dveloppement durable et de lnergie) is an agency of the Government of France, centred on a cabinet member who is often referred to as the "Minister of Ecology". Since April 2014, the position is occupied by socialist Sgolne Royal. The ministry is headquartered in La Grande Arche in La Dfense and also, in the Tour Pascal and Tour Voltaire, in Puteaux/ La Dfense, near Paris. There is also a Delegate Minister for Transport, Sea and Fishing (Ministre dlgu aux Transports,  la Mer et  la Pche) located in the same place. This position is currently occupied by Frdric Cuvillier.
From 1974 to 1977, the position was renamed Minister of Quality of Life; in 1978 this became Minister of the Environment and Way of Life. The current position title features the expression sustainable development, in part due to the influence of the Green party and the pro-environmental movement in French politics over the past decade.
An Environmental Charter was included in the French Constitution in 2004.
This Ministry is responsible for State Environmental Policy (Preservation of Biodiversity, Climate Kyoto Protocol Application, Environmental Control of industries, etc.), Transportation (air, road, railway and sea regulation departments), Sea, and Housing Policy. The Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development, Transport and Housing distributes funds to Research Agencies or Councils.


== Subordinate agencies ==
Bureau d'Enqutes et d'Analyses pour la Scurit de l'Aviation Civile (BEA)
Directorate General for Civil Aviation (DGAC)


=== French Housing Policy ===
The Department of Housing was created after the Second World War to compensate for the destruction of housing during the Liberation.
In 2009, the Minister of Housing and City (full title is Minister of Territorial Equality and Housing) reported to the Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development, Transport and Housing. This post became the Minister of Housing. In 2012, the minister was Ccile Duflot (with the title Ministre de l'Egalit des Territoires et du Logement).
In May 2012 the Ayrault government established the Le Ministre de l'galit des Territoires et du Logement managed by the ecologist Ccile Duflot and Franois Lamy.


== Former names ==
Previously it was called the Ministry of Ecology, Energy, Sustainable Development and Sea (Ministre de l'cologie, de l'nergie, du Dveloppement durable et de la Mer, MEEDDM). It also had been called the Ministry of Ecology, Energy, Sustainable Development and Town and Country Planning (Ministre de l'cologie, de l'nergie, du Dveloppement durable et de l'Amnagement du territoire, MEEDDAT). It also once operated as the Ministry for Ecology, Sustainable Development and Spatial Planning (Ministre de lcologie, du Dveloppement et de lAmnagement durables, MEDAD). Another occasion, it was the Ministry of Ecology and Sustainable Development (Ministre de l'cologie et du dveloppement durable). It also had been the Ministry of Country Planning and Environment (Ministre de l'Amnagement du Territoire et de l'Environnement).


== See also ==
List of French ministers of the environment
Directorate General for Civil Aviation


== Notes and references ==


== External links ==
Ministre de l'cologie, de l'nergie, du Dveloppement durable et de la Mer (French)
"Organisation Chart." (English)

Ministry of Country Planning and Environment (English) (Archive)
Ministry for Ecology, Sustainable Development and Spatial Planning (Archive) (French)