Petrified wood (from the Greek root petro meaning "rock" or "stone"; literally "wood turned into stone") is the name given to a special type of fossilized remains of terrestrial vegetation. It is the result of a tree or tree-like plants having completely transitioned to stone by the process of permineralization. All the organic materials have been replaced with minerals (mostly a silicate, such as quartz), while retaining the original structure of the stem tissue. Unlike other types of fossils which are typically impressions or compressions, petrified wood is a three-dimensional representation of the original organic material. The petrifaction process occurs underground, when wood becomes buried under sediment or volcanic ash and is initially preserved due to a lack of oxygen which inhibits aerobic decomposition. Mineral-laden water flowing through the covering material deposits minerals in the plant's cells; as the plant's lignin and cellulose decay, a stone mold forms in its place. The organic matter needs to become petrified before it decomposes completely. A forest where such material has petrified becomes known as a petrified forest.


== Elements ==
Elements such as manganese, iron, and copper in the water/mud during the petrification process give petrified wood a variety of color ranges. Pure quartz crystals are colorless, but when contaminants are added to the process the crystals take on a yellow, red, or other tint.
Following is a list of contaminating elements and related color hues:
carbon  black
cobalt  green/blue
chromium  green/blue
copper  green/blue
iron oxides  red, brown, and yellow
manganese  pink/orange
manganese oxides  blackish/yellow
Petrified wood can preserve the original structure of the stem in all its detail, down to the microscopic level. Structures such as tree rings and the various tissues are often observed features.
Petrified wood is a fossil in which the organic remains have been replaced by minerals in the slow process of being replaced with stone. This petrification process generally results in a quartz chalcedony mineralization. Special rare conditions must be met in order for the fallen stem to be transformed into fossil wood or petrified wood. In general, the fallen plants get buried in an environment free of oxygen (anaerobic environment), which preserves the original plant structure and general appearance. The other conditions include a regular access to mineral rich water in contact with the tissues, replacing the organic plant structure with inorganic minerals. The end result is petrified wood, a plant, with its original basic structure in place, replaced by stone. Exotic minerals allow the rare red and green hues that can be seen in more rare specimens.


== Locations ==
Areas with a large number of petrified trees include:
Argentina  the Petrified Forest National Monument in Santa Cruz Province in the Argentine Patagonia has many trees that measure more than 3 m (10 ft) in diameter and 30 m (100 ft) long.
Australia  has deposits of petrified and opalised wood. Chinchilla, Queensland is famous for its 'Chinchilla Red'.
Belgium  Geosite Goudberg near Hoegaarden.
Brazil  in the geopark of Paleorrota, there is a vast area with petrified trees. Petrified forests of dicksoniaceae (specifically Psaronius and Tietea singularis) and arthropitys can also be found in the states of So Paulo and Tocantins (in the Monumento Natural das rvores Fossilizadas, Fossil Trees Natural Monument).
Canada  in the badlands of southern Alberta; Petrified wood is the provincial stone of Alberta. Axel Heiberg Island in Nunavut has a large petrified forest. In and around the North Saskatchewan river, around the Edmonton area.
China  in the Junggar Basin of Xinjiang, northwest China government has issued a crackdown on collecting of this material, but large slabs and even large meeting tables have been made out of the colorful petrified wood.
Czech Republic, Nov Paka  The most famous locality on Permian-Carboniferous rocks in the Czech Republic.
Germany  the museum of natural history in Chemnitz has a collection of petrified trees, from the in situ Chemnitz Petrified Forest, found in the town since 1737.
Ecuador  Puyango petrified forest. One of the largest collections of petrified wood in the world.
Egypt  petrified forest in Cairo-Suez road, declared a national protectorate by the minstery of environment, also in the area of New Cairo at the Extension of Nasr city, El Qattamiyya, near El Maadi district, and Al Farafra oasis.
France  petrified forest in the village of Champclauson
Greece  Petrified Forest of Lesvos, at the western tip of the island of Lesbos, is possibly the largest of the petrified forests, covering an area of over 150 km and declared a National Monument in 1985. Large, upright trunks complete with root systems can be found, as well as trunks up to 22 m in length.
India  a geological site known for its petrified wood Thiruvakkarai Village in Chennai, Tamil Nadu. The site is protected by the Geological Survey of India. Petrified wood covers a large area in this site. Petrified Wood has also been discovered in Dholavira in Kutch, Gujarat, dating back to 187-176 million years.
Indonesia  petrified wood covers several area in Banten and also in some part of Mount Halimun Salak National Park.
Israel  several examples of petrified wood occur in the HaMakhtesh HaGadol in the Negev desert.
Libya  Great Sand Sea  Hundreds of square miles of petrified trunks, branches and other debris mixed with Stone Age artifacts
Namibia  petrified forest of Damaraland
New Zealand:
Curio Bay on the Catlins coast contains many petrified wood examples.
Fossil Forest, Takapuna, Auckland, New Zealand

Saudi Arabia  petrified forest north of Riyadh
Thailand  Bantak Petrified Forest Park in Ban Tak District
Ukraine  petrified araucaria trunks near Druzhkivka
United Kingdom  many examples of petrified submerged forests can be found at low tide around the coast of England and Wales.Fossil Grove, Glasgow, Scotland
Fossil Forest, Dorset, England

United States  petrified wood sites include:
Petrified Wood Park in Lemmon, South Dakota
Ginkgo/Wanapum State Park in Washington State
Petrified Forest National Park in Arizona
Petrified Forest (California) in California
Mississippi Petrified Forest in Flora, Mississippi
Florissant Fossil Beds National Monument near Florissant, Colorado
Yellowstone Petrified Forest and Gallatin Petrified Forest, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming
The south unit of Theodore Roosevelt National Park outside Medora, North Dakota
Gilboa Fossil Forest, New York
Escalante Petrified Forest State Park in Utah
Agate Desert in the Upper Rogue River Valley near Medford, Oregon


== Artificial petrified wood ==
Artificial petrified wood has been produced in a Washington laboratory. In the process, small cubes of pine are soaked in an acid bath for two days, then in a silica solution for another two. The product is then cooked at 1400 C in an argon atmosphere for two hours. The result was silicon carbide ceramic which preserved the intricate cell structure of the wood.


== See also ==
Amethyst Mountain
Araucarioxylon arizonicum
Fossil wood
Petrified forest of Lesbos
Petrified palmwood
Submerged forest
Wood opal


== References ==


== External links ==
The Petrified forest of Lesvos - Protected Natural Monument
The Town Museum of Nov Paka
The Mississippi Petrified Forest