Symbiosis School of Economics, Pune (SSE), is a private college in Pune, India specializing in economics which is under the academic control of Symbiosis International University. It has become one of the most prominent colleges in India for economics due to its rigorous curriculum and international approach. It is accredited by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council with an 'A'-Grade.


== History ==
It was founded in 2008 as a constituent of Symbiosis International University as per Section 3 of the UGC act, 1956 by Notification No.F9-12/2001-U3, Government of India. It was inaugurated by Dr. S. B. Mujumdar, President & Founder Director and Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia, then Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission on 1 August 2008.


== Campus ==
Symbiosis School of Economics is located at the hillside campus of Symbiosis International University on Senapati Bapat Road in Pune city. It shares the campus along with three other Symbiosis colleges, namely, Symbiosis Institute of Health Sciences,Symbiosis College of Arts and Commerce, Symbiosis College of Nursing.


== Organization and administration ==
The college is under the jurisdiction of Symbiosis International University. The management committees of the University plan the major issues of planning, development and supervision of academics. The Principal Director of Symbiosis School of Economics is Vidya Yeravdekar. The Director is Dr Jyoti Chandiramani who is also the Dean of the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Symbiosis International University.


== Academics ==


=== Courses and Programmes ===
The college offers the following courses :
Undergraduate: The Bachelor of Science degree course in Economics (Honours) or "B.Sc. (Economics Honours)", a 3-year full-time graduation programme incorporating a variety of topics like Accounts, Environmental Economics, International Relations, Political Economy of India, Research Methodology etc., is not generally offered in traditional economics graduation programs. Admission for the undergraduate course is done through conduct of Symbiosis Entrance Test, a common test for undergraduate courses under Symbiosis International University. 112 students are finally selected and offered admission. B.Sc. Economics (Honours) is offered from the Academic Year 2014 onward sunder the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences.
Post-graduate: The Master of Science degree course in Economics or "M.Sc. (Economics)", a 2-year full-time graduation programme, develops a strong background in Economic Theory, Mathematics, Statistics and Econometrics. It also provides a special focus within the various branches of Economics, namely its related as well as sub-fields. Admission for the post-graduate course is done through conduct of Symbiosis National Aptitude Test, a common test for post-graduate courses under Symbiosis International University. Intake is 40 students.
Diploma: The Post Graduate Diploma in "Public Policy and Governance", is a one-year full-time course in the field of policy research and governance in India. The course objective is to create a strong foundation in a multidisciplinary framework thereby leading to the emergence of budding academicians & professionals trained in such public policy and governance. Admission is through application and selection is based on merit. Intake is 40 students.
Besides this, the College is responsible for many academic facets of Symbiosis International University including designing the Ph. D. course work, formulating and conducting classes for the doctorate program of the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences. It also offers a Certificate Course in Quantitative Techniques, Corporate Social Responsibility and Urban Governance in India and NSE Certified Capital Market Professional. The college has also come up with a monthly newsletter known as Dualis where students would be contributing articles related to daily economic issues, theories and self proposed model.
The Institute, though newly raised, has gained a prominent status as is evident from thousands of aspirants for the undergraduate course who sit for the highly competitive written examination. In 2013, around 90,000 applicants of those who appeared for SET, 32,000 applied for the Symbiosis School of Economics. Out of the successful candidates around 300 students were shortlisted for Group Discussion/Writing Ability Test (PI/WAT) at various centers, with only 112 making the grade.


=== Co-Academics ===
The international collaborations of SSE include the London School of Economics, Wharton School of Business, Harvard Business School, Nanyang Technological University, Berlin School of Economics & others. It also has an internationalization student exchange programme with Canada. The school also conducts national conferences, cultural fests as well as organizing outbound programs for student development.


==== National Conference ====
Symbiosis School of Economics organized its first national level conference on 1718 February 2011. The topic of the conference was Urban Policy and Planning: A case perspective of Pune. The conference had 9 tracks that dealt with issues around formation of urban policies and planning initiatives throughout the country with special focus on Pune. Students along with faculty members were also involved in pre-conference research work which sought to promote greater understanding and better learning for students.


==== Cultural Events ====

SSE organizes various cultural events for the purpose of overall development of students which includes the official college festivals as well as other activities. The first festival organised named Eclectic Paradigm was held in 2010 as an intra-collegiate fest. It was a precursor to the annual inter-collegiate festival that was started a year later, i.e. Laissez Faire, and was open to all colleges and the general public. The term Laissez-faire was selected being an economics term denoting free-market conditions and also because the letters "SSE" are present within the term.

SSE hosted its second annual fest LaissezFaire 2013 on 11, 12 and 13 February 2013. Over the three days of the fest had three keynote speakers and four panel discussions that engaged in an exchange of ideas in contemporary economic issues. The main speakers at the fest were Mr. Devdutt Pattanaik (writer, speaker and mythologist), Mr. Harish Krishnamachar (Country Head and Senior Vice President of World Sport Group), Mr. Phanindra Sama (CEO, Redbus.in ), Dr. Vivek Dahejia, Dr. Shubhada Rao and Mr. Dileep Padgaonkar. The main events included Paper Presentation, Rule of The Roost (Debate), Pantomath (Quiz), Marketing Challenge, Panel Discussion, Reel Life and Treaure Hunt. Vodafone was the Title sponsor whereas, Economic Times was the print media partner, Red FM as the radio media partner and Allen Solly as the Fashion Partner.
SSE hosted its third annual fest LaissezFaire 2014 on 14 and 15 February 2014.
SSE hosted its fourth annual fest LaissezFaire 2014 on 5th- 10th January 2015. In 2015 LaissezFaire Fest celebrated cinema ranging from the earliest days of silent cinema to the most recent releases; through ambience, events and screenings. Fest explored the enthralling world of film. With participation from over 30 colleges across the country, that took part in over 25 diverse and varied events. The Fest was conducted in association with VH1 and INOX Leisure Limited 


==== Placements & Other Achievements ====
Students are widely placed. Students got placements in prestigious institutions such as Goldman Sachs,Morgan Stanley,Facebook,UBS, Citibank, Procter & Gamble, etc.
Dr. Jyoti Chandiramani (Director, SSE) has authored chapters for the book titled "Perspectives In Urban Development Issues In Infrastructure" and Shariq Us Sabah former (B.Sc. Student) has authored two poetry books titled "The Subdued Sound" and "Manifesto of a lover".


== References ==


== External links ==
PARISAR presentation at the National Conference 2011