Taste, gustatory perception, or gustation is the sensory impression of food or other substances on the tongue and is one of the five traditional senses.
Taste is the sensation produced when a substance in the mouth reacts chemically with taste receptor cells located on taste buds. Taste, along with smell (olfaction) and trigeminal nerve stimulation (registering texture, pain, and temperature), determines flavors of food or other substances. Humans have taste receptors on taste buds (gustatory calyculi) and other areas including the upper surface of the tongue and the epiglottis.
The tongue is covered with thousands of small bumps called papillae, which are visible to the naked eye. Within each papilla are hundreds of taste buds. The exception to this is the filiform papillae that do not contain taste buds. There are between 2000 and 5000 taste buds that are located on the back and front of the tongue. Others are located on the roof, sides and back of the mouth, and in the throat. Each taste bud contains 50 to 100 taste receptor cells.
The sensation of taste can be categorized into five basic tastes: sweetness, sourness, saltiness, bitterness, and umami. Taste buds are able to differentiate among different tastes through detecting interaction with different molecules or ions. Sweet, umami, and bitter tastes are triggered by the binding of molecules to G protein-coupled receptors on the cell membranes of taste buds. Saltiness and sourness are perceived when alkali metal or hydrogen ions enter taste buds, respectively.
The basic tastes contribute only partially to the sensation and flavor of food in the mouthother factors include smell, detected by the olfactory epithelium of the nose; texture, detected through a variety of mechanoreceptors, muscle nerves, etc.; temperature, detected by thermoreceptors; and "coolness" (such as of menthol) and "hotness" (pungency), through chemesthesis.
As taste senses both harmful and beneficial things, all basic tastes are classified as either aversive or appetitive, depending upon the effect the things they sense have on our bodies. Sweetness helps to identify energy-rich foods, while bitterness serves as a warning sign of poisons.
Taste perception fades with age: On average, people lose half their taste receptors by the time they turn 20. Not all animals can sense all tastes.


== IntroductionEdit ==


=== HistoryEdit ===
In the West, Aristotle postulated in c. 350 BCE that the two most basic tastes were sweet and bitter. He was one of the first to develop a list of basic tastes.
Ayurveda, an ancient Indian healing science, has its own tradition of basic tastes, comprising sweet, salty, sour, pungent, bitter & astringent.
Similarly, the Ancient Chinese regarded spiciness as a basic taste.


=== Recent discoveriesEdit ===
The receptors for the basic tastes of bitter, sweet and umami have been identified. They are G protein-coupled receptors. The cells that detect sourness have been identified as a subpopulation that express the protein PKD2L1. The responses are mediated by an influx of protons into the cells but the receptor for sour is still unknown. The receptor for amiloride-sensitive attractive salty taste in mice has been shown to be a sodium channel. There is some evidence for a sixth taste that senses fatty substances.
In 2010, researchers found bitter taste receptors in lung tissue, which cause airways to relax when a bitter substance is encountered. They believe this mechanism is evolutionarily adaptive because it helps clear lung infections, but could also be exploited to treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.


=== InnervationEdit ===
Taste is brought to the brainstem by three different cranial nerves:
Facial nerve specifically the chorda tympani, for the anterior 2/3 of the tongue and soft palate.
Glossopharyngeal nerve for the posterior 1/3 of the tongue as well as portions of the upper pharynx.
Vagus nerve for the small area on the epiglottis.


== Basic tastesEdit ==
For a long period, it was commonly accepted that there is a finite and small number of "basic tastes" of which all seemingly complex tastes are ultimately composed. Just as with primary colors, the "basic" quality of those sensations derives chiefly from the nature of human perception, in this case the different sorts of tastes the human tongue can identify. As of the early twentieth century, physiologists and psychologists believed there were four basic tastes: sweetness, sourness, saltiness, and bitterness. At that time umami was not proposed as a fifth taste but now a large number of authorities recognize it as the fifth taste. In Asian countries within the sphere of mainly Chinese and Indian cultural influence, pungency (piquancy or hotness) had traditionally been considered a sixth basic taste. In 2015, researchers at Purdue University suggested a new basic taste called oleogustus.


=== SweetnessEdit ===

Sweetness, usually regarded as a pleasurable sensation, is produced by the presence of sugars and a few other substances. Sweetness is often connected to aldehydes and ketones, which contain a carbonyl group. Sweetness is detected by a variety of G protein coupled receptors coupled to the G protein gustducin found on the taste buds. At least two different variants of the "sweetness receptors" must be activated for the brain to register sweetness. Compounds the brain senses as sweet are thus compounds that can bind with varying bond strength to two different sweetness receptors. These receptors are T1R2+3 (heterodimer) and T1R3 (homodimer), which account for all sweet sensing in humans and animals. Taste detection thresholds for sweet substances are rated relative to sucrose, which has an index of 1. The average human detection threshold for sucrose is 10 millimoles per liter. For lactose it is 30 millimoles per liter, with a sweetness index of 0.3, and 5-Nitro-2-propoxyaniline 0.002 millimoles per liter.


=== SournessEdit ===

Sourness is the taste that detects acidity. The sourness of substances is rated relative to dilute hydrochloric acid, which has a sourness index of 1. By comparison, tartaric acid has a sourness index of 0.7, citric acid an index of 0.46, and carbonic acid an index of 0.06.
Sour taste is detected by a small subset of cells that are distributed across all taste buds in the tongue. Sour taste cells can be identified by expression of the protein PKD2L1, although this gene is not required for sour responses. There is evidence that the protons that are abundant in sour substances can directly enter the sour taste cells. This transfer of positive charge into the cell can itself trigger an electrical response. It has also been proposed that weak acids such as acetic acid, which are not fully dissociated at physiological pH values, can penetrate taste cells and thereby elicit an electrical response. According to this mechanism, intracellular hydrogen ions inhibit potassium channels, which normally function to hyperpolarize the cell. By a combination of direct intake of hydrogen ions (which itself depolarizes the cell) and the inhibition of the hyperpolarizing channel, sourness causes the taste cell to fire action potentials and release neurotransmitter. The mechanism by which animals detect sour is still not completely understood.
The most common food group that contains naturally sour foods is fruit, such as lemon, grape, orange, tamarind, and sometimes melon. Wine also usually has a sour tinge to its flavor, and if not kept correctly, milk can spoil and develop a sour taste. Children in the US and UK show a greater enjoyment of sour flavors than adults, and sour candy is popular in North America including Cry Babies, Warheads, Lemon drops, Shock Tarts and sour versions of Skittles and Starburst. Many of these candies contain citric acid.


=== SaltinessEdit ===

Saltiness is a taste produced primarily by the presence of sodium ions. Other ions of the alkali metals group also taste salty, but the further from sodium, the less salty the sensation is. The size of lithium and potassium ions most closely resemble those of sodium, and thus the saltiness is most similar. In contrast, rubidium and cesium ions are far larger, so their salty taste differs accordingly. The saltiness of substances is rated relative to sodium chloride (NaCl), which has an index of 1. Potassium, as potassium chloride (KCl), is the principal ingredient in salt substitutes and has a saltiness index of 0.6.
Other monovalent cations, e.g. ammonium, NH4+, and divalent cations of the alkali earth metal group of the periodic table, e.g. calcium, Ca2+, ions generally elicit a bitter rather than a salty taste even though they, too, can pass directly through ion channels in the tongue, generating an action potential.


=== BitternessEdit ===

Bitterness is the most sensitive of the tastes, and many perceive it as unpleasant, sharp, or disagreeable, but it is sometimes desirable and intentionally added via various bittering agents. Common bitter foods and beverages include coffee, unsweetened cocoa, South American mate, bitter gourd, olives, citrus peel, many plants in the Brassicaceae family, dandelion greens, wild chicory, and escarole. The ethanol in alcoholic beverages tastes bitter, as do the additional bitter ingredients found in some alcoholic beverages including hops in beer and orange in bitters. Quinine is also known for its bitter taste and is found in tonic water.

Bitterness is of interest to those who study evolution, as well as various health researchers since a large number of natural bitter compounds are known to be toxic. The ability to detect bitter-tasting, toxic compounds at low thresholds is considered to provide an important protective function. Plant leaves often contain toxic compounds, yet even amongst leaf-eating primates, there is a tendency to prefer immature leaves, which tend to be higher in protein and lower in fiber and poisons than mature leaves. Amongst humans, various food processing techniques are used worldwide to detoxify otherwise inedible foods and make them palatable. Furthermore, the use of fire, changes in diet, and avoidance of toxins has led to neutral evolution in human bitter sensitivity. This has allowed several loss of function mutations that has led to a reduced sensory capacity towards bitterness in humans when compared to other species.
The threshold for stimulation of bitter taste by quinine averages a concentration of 8 M (8 micromolar). The taste thresholds of other bitter substances are rated relative to quinine, which is thus given a reference index of 1. For example, Brucine has an index of 11, is thus perceived as intensely more bitter than quinine, and is detected at a much lower solution threshold. The most bitter substance known is the synthetic chemical denatonium, which has an index of 1,000. It is used as an aversive agent (a bitterant) that is added to toxic substances to prevent accidental ingestion. This was discovered in 1958 during research on lignocaine, a local anesthetic, by MacFarlan Smith of Gorgie, Edinburgh, Scotland.
Research has shown that TAS2Rs (taste receptors, type 2, also known as T2Rs) such as TAS2R38 coupled to the G protein gustducin are responsible for the human ability to taste bitter substances. They are identified not only by their ability to taste for certain "bitter" ligands, but also by the morphology of the receptor itself (surface bound, monomeric). The TAS2R family in humans is thought to comprise about 25 different taste receptors, some of which can recognize a wide variety of bitter-tasting compounds. Over 550 bitter-tasting compounds have been identified, of which about 100 have been assigned to one or more specific receptors. Recently it is speculated that the selective constraints on the TAS2R family have been weakened due to the relatively high rate of mutation and pseudogenization. Researchers use two synthetic substances, phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and 6-n-propylthiouracil (PROP) to study the genetics of bitter perception. These two substances taste bitter to some people, but are virtually tasteless to others. Among the tasters, some are so-called "supertasters" to whom PTC and PROP are extremely bitter. The variation in sensitivity is determined by two common alleles at the TAS2R38 locus. This genetic variation in the ability to taste a substance has been a source of great interest to those who study genetics.


=== UmamiEdit ===

Umami is an appetitive taste and is described as a savory or meaty taste. It can be tasted in cheese and soy sauce, and is also found in many other fermented and aged foods. This taste is also present in tomatoes, grains, and beans.
A loanword from Japanese meaning "good flavor" or "good taste", umami () is considered fundamental to many Eastern cuisines, although it was only recently recognized in the West as a basic taste. Umami, or scrumptiousness, was studied and identified by Kikunae Ikeda, who began to analyze kombu in 1907, attempting to isolate its dashi taste. He isolated a substance he called ajinomoto, Japanese for at the origin of flavor. Later called Monosodium glutamate (MSG), and sold as a food additive, it produces a strong umami taste.
Some umami taste buds respond specifically to glutamate in the same way that "sweet" ones respond to sugar. Glutamate binds to a variant of G protein coupled glutamate receptors. See TAS1R1 and TAS1R3 pages for a further explanation of the amino-acid taste receptor.


== Measuring relative tastesEdit ==
Measuring the degree to which a substance presents one basic taste can be achieved in a subjective way by comparing its taste to a reference substance.
Sweetness is subjectively measured by comparing the threshold values, or level at which the presence of a dilute substance can be detected by a human taster, of different sweet substances. Substances are usually measured relative to sucrose, which is usually given an arbitrary index of 1 or 100. Fructose is about 1.4 times sweeter than sucrose; glucose, a sugar found in honey and vegetables, is about three-quarters as sweet; and lactose, a milk sugar, is one-half as sweet.
The sourness of a substance can be rated by comparing it to very dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl).
Relative saltiness can be rated by comparison to a dilute salt solution.
Quinine, a bitter medicinal found in tonic water, can be used to subjectively rate the bitterness of a substance. Units of dilute quinine hydrochloride (1 g in 2000 mL of water) can be used to measure the threshold bitterness concentration, the level at which the presence of a dilute bitter substance can be detected by a human taster, of other compounds. More formal chemical analysis, while possible, is difficult.


== Functional structureEdit ==

Sweetness
Sweetness is produced by the presence of sugars, some proteins, and a few other substances. It is often connected to aldehydes and ketones, which contain a carbonyl group. Sweetness is detected by a variety of G protein-coupled receptors coupled to a G protein that acts as an intermediary in the communication between taste bud and brain, gustducin. These receptors are T1R2+3 (heterodimer) and T1R3 (homodimer), which account for sweet sensing in humans and other animals.
Sourness
Sourness is acidity, and, like salt, it is a taste sensed using ion channels. Hydrogen ion channels detect the concentration of hydronium ions that are formed from acids and water. In addition, the taste receptor PKD2L1 has been found to be involved in tasting sour.
Saltiness
Saltiness is a taste produced best by the presence of cations (such as Na+, K+ or Li+) and, like sour, it is tasted using ion channels.
Other monovalent cations, e.g., ammonium, NH+
4, and divalent cations of the alkali earth metal group of the periodic table, e.g., calcium, Ca2+, ions, in general, elicit a bitter rather than a salty taste even though they, too, can pass directly through ion channels in the tongue.
Bitterness
Research has shown that TAS2Rs (taste receptors, type 2, also known as T2Rs) such as TAS2R38 are responsible for the human ability to taste bitter substances. They are identified not only by their ability to taste certain bitter ligands, but also by the morphology of the receptor itself (surface bound, monomeric).
Umami
The amino acid glutamic acid is responsible for umami, but some nucleotides (inosinic acid and guanylic acid) can act as complements, enhancing the taste.
Glutamic acid binds to a variant of the G protein-coupled receptor, producing an umami taste.


== Further sensationsEdit ==
The tongue can also feel other sensations not generally included in the basic tastes. These are largely detected by the somatosensory system.


=== Pungency (also spiciness or hotness)Edit ===

Substances such as ethanol and capsaicin cause a burning sensation by inducing a trigeminal nerve reaction together with normal taste reception. The sensation of heat is caused by the food's activating nerves that express TRPV1 and TRPA1 receptors. Two main plant-derived compounds that provide this sensation are capsaicin from chili peppers and piperine from black pepper. The piquant ("hot" or "spicy") sensation provided by chili peppers, black pepper, and other spices like ginger and horseradish plays an important role in a diverse range of cuisines across the worldespecially in equatorial and sub-tropical climates, such as Ethiopian, Peruvian, Hungarian, Indian, Korean, Indonesian, Lao, Malaysian, Mexican, New Mexican, Singaporean, Southwest Chinese (including Szechuan cuisine), Vietnamese, and Thai cuisines.
This particular sensation, called chemesthesis, is not a taste in the technical sense, because the sensation does not arise from taste buds, and a different set of nerve fibers carry it to the brain. Foods like chili peppers activate nerve fibers directly; the sensation interpreted as "hot" results from the stimulation of somatosensory (pain/temperature) fibers on the tongue. Many parts of the body with exposed membranes but no taste sensors (such as the nasal cavity, under the fingernails, surface of the eye or a wound) produce a similar sensation of heat when exposed to hotness agents. Asian countries within the sphere of, mainly, Chinese, Indian, and Japanese cultural influence, traditionally consider pungency a sixth basic taste.


=== CoolnessEdit ===
Some substances activate cold trigeminal receptors even when not at low temperatures. This "fresh" or "minty" sensation can be tasted in peppermint, spearmint, menthol, ethanol, and camphor. Caused by activation of the same mechanism that signals cold, TRPM8 ion channels on nerve cells, unlike the actual change in temperature described for sugar substitutes, this coolness is only a perceived phenomenon.


=== NumbnessEdit ===
Both Chinese and Batak Toba cooking include the idea of  (m or mati rasa), a tingling numbness caused by spices such as Sichuan pepper. The cuisines of Sichuan province in China and of the Indonesia province North Sumatra often combine this with chili pepper to produce a  ml, "numbing-and-hot", or "mati rasa" flavor. These sensations although not taste fall into a category of Chemesthesis.


=== AstringencyEdit ===
Some foods, such as unripe fruits, contain tannins or calcium oxalate that cause an astringent or puckering sensation of the mucous membrane of the mouth. Examples include tea, red wine, rhubarb, and unripe persimmons and bananas.
Less exact terms for the astringent sensation are "dry", "rough", "harsh" (especially for wine), "tart" (normally referring to sourness), "rubbery", "hard" or "styptic".
When referring to wine, dry is the opposite of sweet, and does not refer to astringency. Wines that contain tannins and so cause an astringent sensation are not necessarily classified as "dry," and "dry" wines are not necessarily astringent.
In the Indian Ayurvedic tradition, one of the six tastes is astringency (kasaaya).


=== MetallicnessEdit ===
A metallic taste may be caused by food and drink, certain medicines or amalgam dental fillings. It is generally considered an off flavor when present in food and drink. A metallic taste may be caused by galvanic reactions in the mouth. In the case where it is caused by dental work, the dissimilar metals used may produce a measurable current. Some artificial sweeteners are perceived to have a metallic taste, which is detected by the TRPV1 receptors. Blood is considered by many people to have a metallic taste. A metallic taste in the mouth is also a symptom of various medical conditions, in which case it may be classified under the symptoms dysgeusia or parageusia, referring to distortions of the sense of taste, and can be caused by various kinds of medication, including saquinavir and zonisamide, and occupational hazards, such as working with pesticides.


=== CalciumEdit ===
The distinctive taste of chalk has been identified as the calcium component of that substance. In 2008, geneticists discovered a CaSR calcium receptor on the tongues of mice. The CaSR receptor is commonly found in the gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and brain. Along with the "sweet" T1R3 receptor, the CaSR receptor can detect calcium as a taste. Whether closely related genes in mice and humans means the phenomenon exists in humans as well is unknown.


=== FattinessEdit ===
Recent research reveals a potential taste receptor called the CD36 receptor. CD36 was targeted as a possible lipid taste receptor because it binds to fat molecules (more specifically, long-chain fatty acids), and it has been localized to taste bud cells (specifically, the circumvallate and foliate papillae). There is a debate over whether we can truly taste fats, and supporters of our ability to taste free fatty acids (FFAs) have based the argument on a few main points: there is an evolutionary advantage to oral fat detection; a potential fat receptor has been located on taste bud cells; fatty acids evoke specific responses that activate gustatory neurons, similar to other currently accepted tastes; and, there is a physiological response to the presence of oral fat. Although CD36 has been studied primarily in mice, research examining human subjects' ability to taste fats found that those with high levels of CD36 expression were more sensitive to tasting fat than were those with low levels of CD36 expression; this study points to a clear association between CD36 receptor quantity and the ability to taste fat.
Other possible fat taste receptors have been identified. G protein-coupled receptors GPR120 and GPR40 have been linked to fat taste, because their absence resulted in reduced preference to two types of fatty acid (linoleic acid and oleic acid), as well as decreased neuronal response to oral fatty acids.
Monovalent cation channel TRPM5 has been implicated in fattiness taste as well, but it is thought to be involved primarily in downstream processing of the taste rather than primary reception, as it is with other tastes such as bitter, sweet, and umami.
A 2015 study, proposed naming the taste of fat as "oleogustus". The main form of fat that is commonly ingested is triglycerides, which are composed of three fatty acids bound together. In this state, triglycerides are able to give fatty foods unique textures that are often described as creaminess. But this texture is not an actual taste. It is only during ingestion that the fatty acids that make up triglycerides are broken apart and the taste of fat is revealed. The taste is commonly related to other, more negative, tastes such as bitter and sour due to how unpleasant the taste is for humans. Richard Mattes, a co-author of the study, explained that low concentrations of these fatty acids can create an overall better flavor in a food, much like how small uses of bitterness can make certain foods more rounded. However, a high concentration of fatty acids in certain foods is generally considered inedible. To demonstrate that individuals can distinguish oleogustus from other flavors, the researchers separated volunteers into groups and had them try samples that also contained the other basic tastes. Volunteers were able to separate the taste of fatty acids into their own category, but the researchers remained concerned whether the taste is distinct enough. This is because the usual "creaminess and viscosity we associate with fatty foods is largely due to triglycerides", while the actual taste of fatty acids is closer to the idea of rancid foods. Mattes described the taste as "more of a warning system" that a certain food should not be eaten.
There are few regularly consumed foods rich in oleogustus, due to the negative flavor that is evoked in large quantities. Foods whose flavor to which oleogustus makes a small contribution include olive oil and fresh butter, along with various kinds of vegetable and nut oils.


=== Heartiness (kokumi)Edit ===
Some Japanese researchers refer to the kokumi of foods. This sensation has also been described as mouthfulness, and appears to be related to a number of -L-glutamyl peptides, which activate a calcium-sensing receptor which is also sensitive to glutathione.


=== TemperatureEdit ===
Temperature can be an essential element of the taste experience. Food and drink thatin a given cultureis traditionally served hot is often considered distasteful if cold, and vice versa. For example, alcoholic beverages, with a few exceptions, are usually thought best when served at room temperature or chilled to varying degrees, but soupsagain, with exceptionsare usually only eaten hot. A cultural example are soft drinks. In North America it is almost always preferred cold, regardless of season. In South America soda is almost exclusively consumed lukewarm in winter, though not in Brazil, where it is only consumed cold.


== Other conceptsEdit ==


=== SupertastersEdit ===

A supertaster is a person whose sense of taste is significantly more sensitive than average. The cause of this heightened response is likely, at least in part, due to an increased number of fungiform papillae. Studies have shown that supertasters require less fat and sugar in their food to get the same satisfying effects. However, contrary to what one might think, these people actually tend to consume more salt than the average person. This is due to their heightened sense of the taste of bitterness, and the presence of salt drowns out the taste of bitterness. (This also explains why supertasters prefer salted cheddar cheese over non-salted.)


=== AftertasteEdit ===

Aftertastes arise after food has been swallowed. An aftertaste can differ from the food it follows. Medicines and tablets may also have a lingering aftertaste, as they can contain certain artificial flavor compounds, such as aspartame (artificial sweetener).


=== Acquired tasteEdit ===

An acquired taste often refers to an appreciation for a food or beverage that is unlikely to be enjoyed by a person who has not had substantial exposure to it, usually because of some unfamiliar aspect of the food or beverage, including a strong or strange odor, taste, or appearance.


== DiseaseEdit ==
Patients with Addison's disease, pituitary insufficiency, or cystic fibrosis sometimes have a hyper-sensitivity to the five primary tastes.


=== Disorders of tasteEdit ===
ageusia (complete loss of taste)
hypogeusia (reduced sense of taste)
dysgeusia (distortion in sense of taste)
parageusia (persistent abnormal taste)
hypergeusia (abnormally heightened sense of taste)


== See alsoEdit ==

Beefy meaty peptide
BitterDB
Digital lollipop
Optimal foraging theory
Palatability
Vomeronasal organ


== NotesEdit ==


=== FootnotesEdit ===


=== CitationsEdit ===


== Further readingEdit ==
The Science of taste at Kitchen Geekery. An informative article about the science behind taste. Written from a culinary science perspective.
Bartoshuk, Linda M (June 1978), "The Psychophysics of Taste" (PDF), American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 31 (6): 10681077, PMID 352127, retrieved 12 September 2010 
Chandrashekar, Jayaram; Hoon, Mark A; Ryba , Nicholas J. P. & Zuker, Charles S (16 November 2006), "The receptors and cells for mammalian taste" (PDF), Nature 444 (7117): 288294, doi:10.1038/nature05401, PMID 17108952, retrieved 13 September 2010 
Chaudhari, Nirupa & Roper, Stephen D (2010), "The cell biology of taste" (PDF), Journal of Cell Biology 190 (3): 285296, doi:10.1083/jcb.201003144, PMC 2922655, PMID 20696704, retrieved 13 September 2010 
Danker, W.H (1968), Basic Principles of Sensory Evaluation, Philadelphia: American Society for Testing and Materials, ISBN 978-0-8031-4572-6, retrieved 13 September 2010 
Dulac, Catherine (17 March 2000), "The Physiology of Taste, Vintage 2000" (PDF), Cell 100 (6): 607610, doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80697-2, PMID 10761926, retrieved 13 September 2010 
Finger, Thomas E, ed. (2009), International Symposium on Olfaction and Taste, Boston: Blackwell, for the New York Academy of Sciences, ISBN 1-57331-738-1, retrieved 12 September 2010  Alternative ISBN 978-1-57331-738-2
Hui, Y.H, ed. (2010), Handbook of Fruit and Vegetable Flavors, Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-470-22721-3, retrieved 13 September 2010  See especially comments and key references in regards taste 
Thomas Hummel & Antje Welge-Lssen, ed. (2006), Taste and Smell: An Update, Advances in Oto-Rhino-Laryngolog, Vol.63, Basel, Switzerland: Karger, ISBN 3-8055-8123-8, retrieved 12 September 2010 
Lawless, Harry T., & Heymann, Hildegarde (1998), Sensory Evaluation of Food: Principles and Practices, New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, ISBN 0-8342-1752-X, retrieved 13 September 2010 
Macbeth, Helen, ed. (2006), Food Preferences and Taste: Continuity and Change, The Anthropology of Food and Nutrition, Vol.2, Providence, Rhode Island: Berghahn Books, ISBN 1-57181-958-4, retrieved 12 September 2010  Paperback ISBN 1-57181-970-3
PATTON HD (1950). "Physiology of smell and taste". Annual Review of Physiology 12 (1): 46984. doi:10.1146/annurev.ph.12.030150.002345. PMID 15411178. 
Reed, Danielle R; Tanaka, Toshiko; and McDaniel, Amanda H (30 June 2006), "Diverse tastes: Genetics of sweet and bitter perception", Physiology & Behavior 88 (3): 215226, doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2006.05.033, PMC 1698869, PMID 16782140  
Reineccius, Gary, ed. (1999), Source Book of Flavours (2nd ed.), Gaithersburg, Maryland: Aspen, ISBN 0-8342-1307-9, retrieved 12 September 2010  Previously published 1994 by Chapman & Hall, New York ISBN 0-442-00376-5 
Schiffman SS (May 1983). "Taste and smell in disease (first of two parts)". The New England Journal of Medicine 308 (21): 12759. doi:10.1056/NEJM198305263082107. PMID 6341841. 
Schiffman SS (June 1983). "Taste and smell in disease (second of two parts)". The New England Journal of Medicine 308 (22): 133743. doi:10.1056/NEJM198306023082207. PMID 6341845. 
Schiffman SS, Graham BG (June 2000). "Taste and smell perception affect appetite and immunity in the elderly". European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 54 Suppl 3: S5463. doi:10.1038/sj.ejcn.1601026. PMID 11041076. 
Seiden, Allen M, ed. (1997), Taste and Smell Disorders, Rhinology and Sinusology, New York: Thieme, ISBN 0-86577-533-8, retrieved 12 September 2010  Alternative ISBN 3-13-107261-X
Shallenberger, R.S (1993), Taste Chemistry, London & New York: Blackie Academic & Professional (imprint of Chapman & Hall), ISBN 0-7514-0150-1, retrieved 12 September 2010 
Svrivastava, R.C. & Rastogi, R.P (2003), "Relative taste indices of some substances", in ., Transport Mediated by Electrical Interfaces, Studies in interface science, vol.18, Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science, ISBN 0-444-51453-8, retrieved 12 September 2010  Taste indices of table 9, p.274 are select sample taken from table in Guyton's Textbook of Medical Physiology (present in all editions) 
Li X, Staszewski L, Xu H, Durick K, Zoller M, Adler E (April 2002). "Human receptors for sweet and umami taste". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99 (7): 46926. doi:10.1073/pnas.072090199. PMC 123709. PMID 11917125. 


== External linksEdit ==
Researchers Define Molecular Basis of Human "Sweet Tooth" and Umami Taste
Statistics on Taste at National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. An informative overview with good list of references.
The Science of taste at Kitchen Geekery. An informative article about the science behind taste. Written from a culinary science perspective.