Prishtina, the capital city of Kosovo, is one of the municipalities with the most severe water shortages in the country. Citizens of Prishtina have to cope with daily water curbs due to the lack of rainfall and snowfall which has left the city's water supplies in a dreadful condition. The current water resources do not fulfill the needs of the overgrowing population of Prishtina. The water supply comes from the two main reservoirs of Batllava and Badovci. However, there are many problems with the water supply that comes from these two reservoirs which supply 92% of the population in Prishtina. As such, the authorities have increased their efforts to remedy the situation and to make sure that such crises do not hit the city again.


== Natural water resources ==


=== Rivers ===
There is no river flowing within the city of Prishtina. Some time ago the rivers of Vellusha and Prishtevka used to flow through Prishtina. However, none of these rivers are visible anymore since they were covered. This was done because people were throwing garbage in the river and the smell resulting from this garbage was so bad which prompted the local authorities to cover both rivers. Currently, Prishtina acquires its water from rivers which are located in nearby areas but not in Prishtina itself.


=== Underground water ===
The current mayor of Prishtina, Shpend Ahmeti, is actively searching for alternative water resources. He has stated that there are many sources of underground water which can be exploited in order to improve the situation of the water supply for Prishtina. The main underground water resources in Prishtina are the wells which have been identified in Pajtimi valley, the Llukar village, and Germia park
The wells in Pajtimi Valley are out of functioning because the valley was used as a construction material waste deposit, which has covered up the wells. Prior to being used for this purpose, the wells used to supply some neighborhoods with water. Hydrogeologists have confirmed that the valley is rich in underground water resources. According to hydro geologists the valley could be a subject of study for recognizing and utilizing new water resources.
Two wells have been identified in the Llukar village; however, they have been out of functioning since 1983. Underground water resources exist in the Germia park as well. Currently, the water that comes from the springs flows to Germia swimming pool.


== Water supply and distribution ==


=== Overview and history of the water supply ===
Pristina started to be supplied with water, which was mainly coming from Germia and Kolevica resources (wells), at a very early period of time.
In 1961, the Regional Water Company began to supply Pristina with water coming from the reservoir of Badovc, which supplied water for a population of 38.593 citizens. In 1979, Pristina began to grow in terms of population and construction. Therefore, the need for more water grew. As a result, the Regional Water Company started to provide larger quantities of water to respond to the growing water demand. The water was mainly coming from the reservoir of Batllava and underground resources of Fushe Kosova and Obiliq.
Since the end of the Kosovan war (1998-1999), the Regional Water Company Batllava underwent some changes. However, in 2007, it became a joint stock company called the Regional Water Company Pristina. Presently, it supplies Pristina, Graqanica, Fushe Kosove, Obiliq, Lipjan, Shtime, Gllogovc, and Podujeva municipalities with water.
Currently the Regional Water Company Pristina provides water supplies and other services for 40% of the population of Kosovo, making it the largest water company in Kosova.


=== Water quality ===
National Institute of Public Health (NIPH), which is within the Ministry of Health, is the responsible organ for monitoring the quality of water. In general, Kosovo is considered to have good tap water quality which also includes Prishtina as one of its most developed cities. Moreover, the water coming from kitchen taps is drinkable.


=== Water usage ===
Industrial purposes
Personal purposes
Domestic purposes
Irrigation purposes
Car washing
Gardening
Fishing
There is a poor quality of data on water resources in Kosovo, including Prishtina. A high portion of the data and information is unreliable, including the data and information on the growth of population, demand for water, usage of water, quality of water, pollution of water and climate change.


=== Batllava reservoir ===
Coordinates: 42.820N 21.311E / 42.820; 21.311
Lake Batllava is an artificial lake located in the region which entails the municipalities of Prishtina, Gjilan, and Mitrovica. It is filled with water from Batllava river which is a sub branch of river Llap. Its basin encompasses an area of 225 km while the total surface area of the lake stands at 2.25 km.
The average flow in the lake of Batllava is 1.06 m per second. The total storage volume of Batllava reservoir is estimated to be 30 million m of which 25.1 million m is exploitable. It has five main sub-basins, which are further divided into smaller ones. Currently, 64% of the population of Prishtina is supplied with drinking water from Batllava reservoir. The basin of Batllava Lake has just recently been cleaned up in order to have clean water when the basin is refilled again. This action took place on 22 February 2014


=== Badovc reservoir ===
Coordinates: 42.623N 21.241E / 42.623; 21.241
Lake Badovc is an artificial lake located in the region which entails the municipalities of Prishtina, Lipjan, and Novo Berdo. It is filled with water from the Graanica river. Its basin encompasses an area of 104 km while the total surface area of the lake stands at 0.89 km. The average flow in the lake Badovc is 1.05 m per second. The total storage volume of Badovc reservoir is 26.4 million m of which 20 million m is exploitable. Currently, 28% of the population of Prishtina is supplied with drinking water from Badovc reservoir. Badovc Lake was cleaned as well in light of the plans to transfer water from other lakes.


== Problems with the water supply ==


=== Climate ===
Kosovo has a continental climate, which is characterized by warm summers and relatively cold and snowy winters. Since Prishtina is located in the region of Rrafshi i Kosovs, the climate is very dry. The climate in Prishtina is characterized by very hot summers with a temperature ranging from 20 C to 37 C and cold winters with a temperature ranging from -10 C to - 26 C. In the winter of 2012, there were blizzards and snow throughout Kosovo, including Prishtina. In the winter of 2013, there were heavy rains and floods.
Currently, in the winter of 2014, Prishtina is facing a drought. It is the driest winter in the past 20 years. There is a severe lack of both rain and snow. This draught has caused the water levels to decrease in both the Batlava and Badovc basins. If the weather continues the same pattern, the reservoirs may be emptied soon. As a result, the people of Prishtina and nearby areas risk being left with no water supply.


=== Leakages in the system ===
Leakages or water technical losses are one of the main concerns for the water supply network in Prishtina. The percentage of water not being distributed to the end consumer, but instead being lost through the distribution network is high, mainly due to the old infrastructure and the lack of investments. However, the exact amount of water which is leaked throughout the distribution system cannot be measured; instead, it can be approximated through non-revenue water. The downside of using this measurement method to approximate the technical losses of water stands in the fact that the non-revenue water, apart from leakages that happen throughout the system, also takes into account the illegal connections on the system which represent commercial losses. The amount of non-revenue water in Prishtina has slightly decreased from 2011 to 2012. Nonetheless, it still remains high. This difference between the water produced and the amount of water billed in Prishtina on 2011 was slightly more than 25 million m, whereas on 2012 it decreased to around 24 million m.


=== Illegal connections to the water system ===
In 2012, The Council for Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms considered water shortages on the behalf of the Regional Water Supply Prishtina as an abuse towards human rights. The company's response for not supplying Prishtina neighborhoods with water was the commercial losses (illegal connections) and redundant water wasted for home irrigation, car washes, and others in substantial quantities. Accordingly, it is unfeasible and abusers should be reprimanded.


== Planning and Management ==


=== Water plant in Shkabaj ===
The Regional Water Company Prishtina with the support of Germanys KfW, the European Union, and other donors initiated the project "Water Plant in the Village Shkabaj". The project encompasses three phases. Phase one aimed to build a new reservoir and upgrade pipe infrastructure. It was completed in May 2012 with a cost of 8 million. Phase two aims to continue upgrading pipe infrastructure to inhibit water loss in five Prishtina neighborhoods. It will cost approximately 17 million. Phase three aims to build a new waste-water treatment plant that will have 700 liters per second capacity, with a further possible addition of 500 liters per second in order for the secure and reliable provision of water supply for 24 hours. It will serve three municipalities: Prishtina, Fush Kosov and Kastrioti. A study that costs approximately 150,000 was initially conducted in order to test the viability of this phase.


=== Other Projects ===
Due to the water crisis that has hit Prishtina, both municipal and central authorities are making efforts to improve the situation. Currently, efforts are being made in transferring water from Lake Ujman to Lake Badovc. The transferring of the water is being done through the channel of Ibr-Lepenc which is being cleaned and tested.
There are active efforts being done in finding additional water resources, mainly from the underground resources in Prishtina. Recently, three new wells were dug successfully in the Germia Park which are expected to improve the situation. The local authorities have also recognized nine wells in the Pajtimi Valley which according to the local authorities are going to be functionalized and utilized soon. These wells have a capacity of sixty liters per second. The municipality of Prishtina has planned to clean up these wells in conjunction with the regional water company.
The wells in village Llukar are being functionalized and are expected to increase the water level in Batllava Lake. These two wells can produce up to fifty liters per second each. In addition, in order to combat this situation of severe water shortages, the regional municipalities have made efforts in improving the inspection of rational water usage. These efforts are expected to improve the situation in the short term.


== References ==