Bardiya District (Nepali:   Listen ), one of the seventy-five Districts of Nepal, is part of Bheri Zone and is headquartered at the city of Gulariya. The district covers an area of 2,025 km and according to the 2001 census the population was 382,649 in 2011 it has 426,576.


== Geography and Climate ==
Bardiya lies in Bheri zone in the Mid-Western Region of Nepal. It covers 2025 square kilometers and lies west of Banke district, south of Surkhet district, east of Kailali district of Seti zone. To the south lies Uttar Pradesh, India; specifically the Lakhimpur and Bahraich districts of Awadh.
Most of Bardiya is in the fertile Terai plains, covered with agricultural land and forest. The northernmost part of the district extends into the Churiya or Siwalik Hills. Bardiya National Park covers 968 km2 occupies most of the northern half of the district. This park is the largest undisturbed wilderness in Nepal's Terai. It provides forest, grassland and riverine habitat for engendered mammal, bird and reptile species. More than 30 species of mammals and more than 250 of birds have been recorded.
Most people living in this district are farmers. The district headquarters Gulariya lies on the Babai River. The Karnali, one of Nepal's largest rivers, divided into multiple branches when it reaches the Terai. The westernmost branch forms the boundary between Bardiya and Kailali districts. An eastern branch is called the Geruwa. The endangered Gangetic dolphin was often seen in its waters, but populations have been declining.


== History ==
Bardiya was part of Kingdom of Nepal before it was ceded to the British East India Company in Sugauli Treaty during Partition of Nepal. Later during the administration of Jang Bahadur Rana, it was returned to Nepal along with Banke, Kailali and Kanchanpur. In the early twentieth century, Bardiya was still covered with forest and sparsely populated with indigenous tribal people called Tharu. Additional Tharus immigrated west from Dang and Deukhuri Valleys. Tharu from Dang and Deukhuri make up a majority of Bardiya's population. Other tribes called Sonaha live near the Karnali River and western periphery of Bardia National Park, who are historically engaged in extracting golden ores from sediments of river and fishing.


== Village Development Committees and Municipalities in Bardiya ==


== References ==


== See also ==
Zones of Nepal
Districts of Nepal at statoids.com