EDP Sciences, dition Diffusion Presse Sciences, is a STM publisher, who works closely with the scientific world. It specialises in the communication and dissemination of scientific information to specialist and general audiences alike (general public, decision-makers, teachers, etc.). EDP Sciences produces and publishes international journals, books, conferences and internet sites with a predominantly scientific or technical content.
EDP Sciences is a publishing house owned by learned societies and run by publishing professionals.


== History ==
EDP Sciences was founded in 1920 under the name La Socit du Journal de Physique et Le Radium. It thus took over the publication of the Journal de Physique (established in 1872) on the occasion of its merger with the journal Le Radium (created in 1904). Among the founders figure the Socit Franaise de Physique and several renowned scientists and industrialists: Antoine Bclre, Louis De Broglie, Marie Curie, Paul Langevin, Louis Lumire, Jean Perrin, and Lon Brillouin, as well as patrons such as Albert I, Prince of Monaco.
The company continued to publish the different sections of the Journal de Physique until the 80s, at which point it started expanding into other areas of physics, particularly astrophysics. Likewise, the company expanded into the publication of books.
Finally, in 1997, it was decided to expand and develop the company in the direction of other scientific communities. This development led the company to change its previous name Les ditions de Physique to EDP Sciences, which means dition Diffusion Presse Sciences, in 1998. With almost 50 international online journals (most of them are indexed in the major databases, such as Web of Science and Scopus), as well as about a hundred websites, EDP Sciences is considered as the first independent French editor, concerning the publishing of international academic journals. Many partnerships with European editors, such as Cambridge University Press and Springer, have been developed.
EDP Sciences is under the joint ownership of the Socit Franaise de Physique, the Socit Chimique de France, the Socit de Mathmatiques Appliques et Industrielles and the Socit franaise d'optique.
Nowadays, EDP Sciences is a publishing group gathering several entities:
EDP Sciences, the publishing partner of the scientific communities;
EDP Sant, the medical branch of the company;
EDP Open, the platform for open access journals.


== Thematics ==
Chemistry
General Knowledge
Mathematics and Computer Science
Health Sciences & Dentistry
Physics, Astronomy and Astrophysics
Engineering & Technology
Social Sciences & Humanities
Life Sciences


== Publications ==

Today, the company publishes more than 50 scientific journals, both paper and electronic, but also professional magazines in the Physics domain (Photoniques, Europhysics News...) and in Health Sciences (Audio Infos, Basse Vision Infos, L'entreprise officinale, Orthophile, Indpendentaire...).It also manages the publishing of several books every year: monographs at Master's level or higher, as well as undergraduate teaching texts, professional works and popular science books.


== Open Access ==
EDP Sciences supports the development of Open Access journals in the context of its support of scientific communities. Part of its catalogue of journals is already in total (gold) or partial (green) open access, and EDP Sciences is rated a "green publisher" by the SHERPA/RoMEO site. EDP Sciences is also a member of OASPA (Open Access Scholarly Publishers Association), which is an organisation set up to support and represent the interests of open access journal publishers in all scientific, technical and scholarly disciplines.


== Web of Conferences ==

Web of Conferences is a portal entirely dedicated to scientific conferences. It offers an international meetings calendar and a space collecting all the conference proceedings published by EDP Sciences. It also provides a complete and flexible proceedings publishing service.


== References ==


== External links ==
EDP Sciences website
Scientific e-library (French)
Dentistry e-library (French)
Dentistry and management e-library(French)
Portal dedicated to scientific conferences
Site officiel de la Socit franaise de chimie (French)
Site officiel de le Socit de Mathmatiques Appliques et Industrielles(French)
Site officiel de la Socit franaise de physique(French)