The Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre is a research facility at the University of Glasgow, Scotland. It is funded by the British Heart Foundation (BHF), and it is also the main facility of the Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences of the [University of Glasgow], it is housed in purpose-built facilities opened in 2006 forming part of the University's 'triangle of excellence', along with the Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre and the Wolfson Medical School. Its foundation was funded jointly by the University and the British Heart Foundation, which also endowed the BHF Chair in Cardiovascular Medicine, currently held by the Centre's Director, Professor Rhian Touyz. The focus of its research is on genetics and vascular biology applied to cardiovascular disease.


== Description ==
There are around 150 research and technical staff, as well as a number of Ph.D. students (sixteen in 2009). Staff are divided into six current research groups: BHF Cardiovascular Research Group, MRC Cardiovascular Research Group, BHF Cardiac and Imaging Group, Heart Failure and Pharmacology Group, CVS & Renal Failure Group and Metabolic Medicine Group. The Director of the Centre is Anna Dominiczak, British Heart Foundation Professor of Cardiovascular Medicine. The West of Scotland has one of the highest rates of cardiovascular disease in the world, and research at the Centre has indicated this may be due to genetic factors.


== Triangle of Excellence ==
The Centre is housed in a purpose-built facility on University Place on the University's Gilmorehill Campus. There is a connecting passage between the Centre and the neighbouring Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre. The twin buildings were built on the site at the same time as the new Wolfson Medical School Building, housing the University of Glasgow Medical School. At the time, the three buildings were described as the University's 'triangle of excellence', "ensuring the future strategic competitiveness of University of Glasgow as an international centre of excellence."


== References ==


== External links ==
Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre