Paul Francis Pelosi, Jr. (born January 23, 1969) is the son of former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, and a speaker on environmental policies encouraging individuals and local governments to take an active role in conserving natural resources and reducing their carbon footprint. Pelosi has spoken on topical environmental issues at conferences in Stockholm, Milan, and Amsterdam.
In 2013, Pelosi joined Hamershlag, Sulzberger & Borg, one of the oldest investment banks firms focused on mergers, equity underwriting and debt offerings.
In 2014, Pelosi became an Advisor to National Strategies, an organization committed to assisting companies to better understand the process of marketing goods and services to local municipalities.
In 2015, Pelosi was elected to the Board of Directors to Budly, Inc., a delivery service app created to increase the speed and ease of delivery for perishable goods. Budly is based in Canada and has operations in the United States.
In 2015, Pelosi was named an Advisor Partner to Visionary, an invitation-only business network developed to pool intellectual and financial resources from around the world, to address challenges facing our communities. For more information, go to link visionary.is.


== Biography ==
Paul Pelosi has 16 years experience in advising emerging and Fortune 500 companies in the areas of finance, infrastructure, sustainability and public policy. Pelosi is a founding member of Cisco Connected Urban Development and under the direction of Cisco CEO John Chambers, Pelosi worked with San Francisco, Birmingham, Amsterdam, Hamburg, Lisbon, Madrid and Seoul to attempt to demonstrate how network connectivity might reduce carbon emissions in urban environments.
In 2003, Pelosi was appointed by San Francisco Mayor Willie Brown to the city's Commission on the Environment. The commission is responsible for developing policies and programs in recycling, toxics reduction, environmental justice, energy efficiency, commute alternatives, climate change, and the city's urban forest. Pelosi served as President of the Commission. During his tenure, San Francisco implemented energy efficiency programs that resulted in a reduction of 28 megawatts of electricity, created programs that increased residential and commercial recycling from 46% to 70%, as well reduced San Francisco's carbon emissions to 6% below 1990 levels, and became the first municipality to implement a ban on plastic bags.Pelosi is a contributor to the anthology Inside the Minds: Navigating Green Construction and Energy Initiatives, from Aspatore Books in Spring 2009.
Pelosi served as Senior Vice President of Business Development at InfoUSA where he is responsible for identifying acquisitions and organizing programs to develop effective strategy for reducing waste.
Pelosi also advised companies including NASA Ames Research Center and AirPatrol Corporation on a variety of infrastructure projects to promote both sustainable development and security. Prior to independent consulting, Pelosi served many years with Bank of America Securities, Bank of America Countrywide and JP Morgan - Chase Manhattan where he worked in Corporate Finance, Institutional Sales, and the Residential Mortgage Industry.
He is on the board of directors of Targeted Medical Pharma, a company traded on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board market.
Pelosi is a graduate of Georgetown University with a Bachelor of Arts in History (Cum Laude, 1991) and a JD/MBA (Joint Degree 1995) with an emphasis in International Business. In 1991, Pelosi was a Gillette All Star Athlete in Track and he received the Georgetown International Human Rights Award in 1994. Pelosi has been a member of the California State Bar since 1996.
The Washington Times reported that a company co-founded by Pelosi, Natural Blue Resources, was charged with violating securities fraud. The charges were civil in nature and Pelosi was not involved with the company at the time, having resigned more than one year before the activities took place.


== References ==


== External links ==
Paul Pelosi, Jr. at Forbes