Republic Plaza (Chinese: ) is one of the three tallest skyscrapers in Singapore, located at the Southern end of Raffles Place in the Downtown Core, the central business district of Singapore. It shares the title of "tallest building" with the OUB Centre and UOB Plaza One. Built at 280 metres (919 feet) tall, it was completed in 1995, and incorporates earthquake proof features despite the city being relatively far from earthquake zones.
The main entrance to the tower is at D'Almeida Street. The building was designed to maximize space. Therefore, a simple square form with chamfered corners at the base was adopted for the design of the tower. The tower tapers as it rises, forming some triangular elements, to reduce buffeting due to strong winds and improve wind loading. As with many other towers, it consists of a central core containing basic functions such as emergency stairways and elevator shafts, wrapped around by lettable office space.
Republic Plaza currently houses the Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group and its various subsidiaries on almost 15 floors, the Honorary Consulate of Mali on the 32nd floor and the Honorary Consulate of the Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on the 58th floor of the building.


== Architecture ==
The tower is turned 45 degrees from the axis of the ground floor level to maintain sea views from the upper floors.
The building has 15 double-decker vertical lifts.
The tower was designed to reflect a subtle Oriental influence.
The main lobby is four storeys high, finished in polished granite and ceramics.
The lobby is framed by concrete-filled tubular steel columns.
The exterior faade transitions from granite with strip windows to tinted wall glass, smoothly inclining from an octagonal base to a square top.


== Facts and figures ==
The tower rose rapidly despite building complications which included an MRT line beside the site, historically important buildings nearby, as well as natural boulders and abandoned piles underground.
The tower was built on a caisson with more than 900 mini piles.
The construction was completed in just under two years using the fast track process.
A total of 8,600 tons of structural steel and 31,000 cubic metres of concrete was used.
After nightfall, only the glass top is visible when it is lit from within.
Office Lettable Area: 769,388 sq ft (71,478.5 m2)
Retail Lettable Area: 18,483 sq ft (1,717.1 m2)


== See also ==
List of tallest buildings in Singapore


== References ==