Vaxess Technologies, Inc. is a company started by a team of four graduate students from Harvard that commercializes a Tufts University technology to stabilize vaccines so they can be shipped and stored without refrigeration.


== History ==
Students Michael Schrader, Livio Valenti, Kathryn Kosuda, and Patrick Ho started Vaxess in December 2011, based on a technology created by David Kaplan and Fiorenzo Omenetto. In 2012, it was awarded $25,000 from Harvard Business School for Harvard's Business Plan Contest in the Business Ventures Track. Vaxess Technologies was a semi-finalist for MIT's $100K Entrepreneurship Competition in the Life Sciences section. In 2012, it won the Harvard President's Challenge in the Global Health section and was awarded $70,000. The company was selected as a finalist for two 2013 MassTLC Awards, Start-Up to Watch and Innovative Technology of the Year: Healthcare/Life Sciences.
In May of 2013, Vaxess received $3.75M in funding from Norwich Ventures and an undisclosed amount of money from angel investor Jeffrey Walker.
In August of 2013, the company announced that it would be moving out of Harvard's Innovation Lab to a new location at LabCentral in Cambridge.
In December of 2013, the Massachusetts Life Sciences Center awarded $1.5M to local startups. Vaxess received $1M of that amount which is the most that the MLSC's Accelerator Loan Program will lend to one organization. Vaxess's CEO Michael Schrader was quoted as saying, "The $1 million Accelerator loan will enable Vaxess to grow the companys internal R&D capabilities and deliver heat-stable vaccines to patients around the world even sooner."
In January of 2014, co-founder Livio Valenti was named by Forbes's 30 Under 30 in Science & Healthcare for his work with Vaxess.
In February of 2014, Vaxess added George Siber, M.D. to their organization as the chair of their Scientific Advisory Board. Previously, Siber served as the EVP and CSO of Wyeth Vaccines. He also played a role in bringing Prevnar to market.
In April of 2014, Vaxess announced that Thomas Monath, MD, and Russell Middaugh, PhD. would join the company's scientific advisory board. Monath being an expert in the field of vaccinology and Middaugh being an expert in the fields of in the fields of biophysical chemistry and pharmaceutical formulation.
In February of 2015, Verizon announced that Vaxess had won one of the $1M Verizon Powerful Answers Awards. Verizon issued approximately $6 million is prizes to 12 different organizations across 4 categories. Vaxess won first place in the Transportation category, above HopOn and Matternet.


== Technology ==
Vaxess's business plan is based around a technology developed by Tufts University Professors Fiorenzo Omenetto and David Kaplan. The technology uses a silk-derived protein called fibroin to stabilize vaccines so that they can be shipped and stored without refrigeration, eliminating the need for the cold chain. Vaxess is working with vaccine manufacturers to develop heat-stable vaccines and targeting a product launch by 2019.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Vaxess Technologies on Twitter